---
layout: post
title: Functional algebra
category: notes
published: false
---

Inspired by [Sonnet's](https://github.com/deepmind/sonnet) abstractions for
parameterised functions I want to revisit  [FAT](https://github.com/act65/FAT).


In Sonnet each function has a forward pass, typical the only real part is written out.
And implicity has a backward gradient function that is build from each op having
its gradient defined. (thus they are kind of like duals, forward - backward)
Sonnet seems to extend this idea to the inverse function (or transpose as they call it).


<!-- Relationship between;
nilpotent duals, automatic differentiation, functional programming, sonnet, FAT, linear algebra. -->

Let $\mathcal F$ be the set of ???.
Define $f \in /mathcal F$ such that;
$$
\begin{align}
\exists & f^{-1}: f^{-1} \circ f \approx identity \approx f \circ f^{-1} \
\exists & \nabla f: \nabla \dot f^T
\exists & \nabla f^{-1}: ???
\end{align}
$$

So to define an algebra (field? group? ???) over the (reals?) we need;
identity, inverse, closure, ?!?, ...


if we want do some algebra with these things we need a richer type system!
important types;
* maps to same dimensionality
* orthogonal transform
* ?


<side>this is true for reverse mode AD, but not necessarily true in general.
need to work with chain rule</side>
$$
\begin{align}
y = B(A(x)) \eqiv ?? \\
f = A \circ B =
\begin{bmatrix}
I & 0 & 0 \\
A & 0 & 0 \\
0 & B & 0 \\
\end{bmatrix} \\
\nabla f = \nabla B \circ \nabla A =
\begin{bmatrix}
I & A & 0 \\
0 & 0 & B \\
0 & 0 & I \\
\end{bmatrix} \\
\end{align}
$$


<side>If we can impose some structure on C, such as being the non-linear
equivalent of diagonal - diagonalisation!?? Then we can find the invariants (B)
under the transform A.</side>
$$
Let A, B, C \in \mathcal F \\
Let B \circ A = A \circ C \\
B = A \circ C \circ A^{-1} \\
$$


Would like to be able to do more algebra with these functionals. However, their
non-linearity stops us from doing much. How can we impose a minimal amount of
structure (like types) to different functionals that will allow us more room to
play with? For example if we knew that A was an orthgogonal transform, only using
relus as their non-linearily then we could ... ???

So what `types` of structured function could we have?
- orthogonal transform?
- what nuances/distinctions/structure are there within diffeent non-linear transforms?
  - one that warps space in a convex manner? ( i am thinking of something like x**3. which stretches, but doesnt map back onto itself, or rotate)
  - periodic non-linearities
  - if it doesnt map back onto itself, then the transform will have a perfect inverse
  -


<!-- how could group theory come into this? symmetry, parameter sharing, ...? -->
<!-- functional quarternions -->
