---
layout: post
title: Linear algebra
---


This post is about why linear algebra is cool. It is a powerful langauge that can easily embed other more interesting languages/systems/grammars/...? For example, computation, dual numbers, holographic representations, ???
Others? What about graphics, or ??, or 


# Linea operators that can be embeddin in LinAlg

Why is this cool? It is a general way to represent things. The power comes from it ability to make different operators by simply chaging structure?

##### Dual and complex numbers

$$
\begin{align}
a + b\epsilon \equiv
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b \\
0 & a \\
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

$$
\begin{align}
a + b i \equiv
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b \\
-b & a \\
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

##### Logic and (quantum) computation


$$
\begin{align}
CNOT \equiv
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

### Memory

[Holographic reduced representations](http://www2.fiit.stuba.sk/~kvasnicka/CognitiveScience/6.prednaska/plate.ieee95.pdf)



### Type-systems

Strongly typed …


### Functions?



### Differentiation

WOWOWOW. A derivative is a linear transform. ?!?! Huh

In the space of polynomials.

\begin{align*}
\frac{d}{dx} &= \begin{bmatrix}
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & \dots \\
0 & 0 & 2 & 0 &  \dots \\
0 &0 & 0 & 3 & \dots \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots \\
\end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

each column is the derivative of a 'basis' function, which in this case is each $x^n$.


# Other ?

### What would we want them to do?

What would a non-linear and differentiable language for structure look like? What language would allow me to differentiably learn, say, a convolution? 


### data structures!!

What alternatives are there to representing information that rival linear algebra? 
* Trees and recursion (which actually ties into linalg - H-Tucker decomposition -- see other post on SVD).
* Graphs?
* ???
* Fields
* 

What ways are there to represent structured info? (should make a separate post)


# Thoughts

Why is linear algebra such an effective language for thinking about and expressing structure in systems? 


### Resources 


